---
weight: 300
title: FAQs
---

# FAQs

## Blockmania

### What's the difference between Blockmania and Chainspace?

Blockmania takes input transactions and guarantees that all honest nodes will agree on the transaction order. It then saves transactions for a given time period into a "block", and hashes the contents of the block along with the signature of the preceding block. This guarantees that data in the blockchain cannot be tampered with (as the hashes wouldn't match).

A single group of Blockmania nodes produce one blockchain. Writes to each blockchain are effectively single-threaded. But what if we want to produce more than one blockchain at the same time?

Chainspace allows multiple Blockmania blockchains to talk to each other. Each grouping of Blockmania nodes becomes a "shard". Shards can operate independenty of each other. Chainspace is a protocol which coordinates operations across more than one shard. Chainspace is built on top of Blockmania; however, other BFT consensus protocols with strong finality guarantees, such as [Tendermint](https://tendermint.com/) or [PBFT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault_tolerance#Practical_Byzantine_fault_tolerance)  could work.

### If other consensus protocols could work, why did you build Blockmania?

When we needed a consensus protocol for Chainspace, we couldn't find a PBFT implementation we liked in a language we liked. Tendermint was the best candidate available, but at the time there wasn't really formal description of how it works (this was remedied in summer 2018). So we decided to come up with our own consensus protocol, which we understood from the ground up.

### What's the difference between Blockmania and similar protocols?

1. Blockmania is leaderless
2. Blockmania radically separates network code from consensus code

#### Leaderlessness

A lot of the complexity in other PBFT-descended protocols comes from the fact that each round of consensus is typically determined by a single leader. For the next round, or block, leadership then moves to another leader. This is fine when the leader is honest; but if the leader is an attacker, the other nodes all need to be able (a) to detect that the leader is an attacker, and (b) elect a new leader, while the older leader is sending potentially confusing or contradictory messages. The code needed to handle that is complex.

We started with a simple idea. If leaders add a lot of complexity, can we get rid of leaders? And we found that we could. This allowed us to write simpler code. Simpler code is typically more secure and also easier to implement, so it was a big win.

#### Separation of networking and consensus

The fact that Blockmania is leaderless also allowed us to separate networking code from consensus. Nodes simply take transactions in, make blocks, and broadcast them to other nodes, as fast as they can. A separate step, totally separate from network code, allows each node to independently reach a view of what other nodes have seen based on a simulation and their signed witness statements.

The complete separation of network code from consensus again simplifies the protocol, making it easier to implement and probably more secure than it would otherwise have been.

## Chainspace
